README.md, before:

Scala Units
===========

Project for run-time interpretation, conversion, and analysis of units
in Scala.

Example:

    val u = new UnitsParser
    // ... load units ...

    val v = 80 * u("km/hr") 
    val t = 5 * u("min")
    val d = v * t

    println(d in u("miles"))  // => 4.1424746 miles


Importing Units
---------------

Units may be loaded from [GNU Units](http://www.gnu.org/software/units/)
definition files.

    val u = new UnitsParser
    val f = Source.fromFile("/usr/share/units/definitions.units", "utf-8")

    u.load(f)

Limitations:

  - ''!include'' directives are not followed.
  - Non-linear units (i.e., function definitions) are not supported.
  - Addition and subtraction is not supported

Definitions may be added manually:

    u.define("fortnight 2 weeks")

The definition should follow the GNU Units
[definition](http://www.gnu.org/software/units/manual/units.html#Unit-Definitions)
format, subject to the limitations above.


Parsing Units
-------------

Units may be parsed from the GNU Units
[expression](http://www.gnu.org/software/units/manual/units.html#Unit-Expressions)
format, subject to the limitations above.

    val x = u("1|3 m / s2")


Common Units
------------

Common units may be imported for convenience:

    val u = new UnitsParser
    // ... load units ...

    val common = new CommonUnits(u)
    import common._

    val g = 9.8 (m / (s ** 2))
    val e = 1.3 (kW) * 8 (hours) in J


Unit Conversion
---------------

### Basic unit conversion

To convert a value to different units, use the "in" operator:

    val x = 1 (m) in ft 
    println(x)  // => 3.280839 ft

### Natural units

To convert a value to the most natural of units from a sequence, use
the "inOneOf" operator with multiple units in descending order by
magnitude.  The units selected will be the first units for which the
numerical value is at least 1, or the last units if none of the provided
units yield a numerical value at least 1.

    val x = 90 (seconds) inOneOf (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => 1.5 min

    val x = 2100 (MHz) inOneOf (GHz, MHz, kHz, Hz)
    println(x)  // => 2.1 GHz

    val x = 1 (mL) inOneOf (gal, quart, pint, cups, tbsp, tsp)
    println(x)  // => 0.2 tsp

### Compound units

To convert a value to compound units (e.g., hours, minutes, seconds),
use the "in" operator with multiple units in descending order by
magnitude.  Each component will have an integral numerical value, except
potentially the last component.  Zero-valued components will be dropped.

    val x = 90.2 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 min, 30.2 s)

    val x = 3602 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 hour, 2 s)

To break up the last component into integral and fractional parts,
simply duplicate the last units:

    val x = 90.2 (seconds) in (hour, min, s, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 min, 30 s, 0.2 s)

To include zero-valued components, use "inAllOf":

    val x = 90.2 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(0 hour, 1 min, 30.2 s)

    val x = 3602 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 hour, 0 min, 2 s)


Dimensional Analysis
--------------------

### Canonical Form

Units may be converted to canonical form using the "canonical" property.
Canonical units are expressed as a scalar value and powers of primitive
units.

    println(kW canonical)  // => 1000 kg m^2 s^-3

Values may be converted between units if, in their canonical form, the
exponents on all primitive units are identical.

### Testing for Compatibility

To test for compatibility between units, use the "is" operator.

    val x = 55 (miles / hour)
    println(x is meter / second)  // => true
    println(x is kW)              // => false

CommonUnits provides pseudo-units for classes of units (time, length,
area, etc), to make dimensional analysis more convenient/readable.

    val x = 55 (miles / hour)
    println(x is speed)  // => true
    println(x is power)  // => false

    println(speed is time / length)  // => true
    println(mpg is 1 / area)         // => true (yes.. it really is)

Contrary to the popular refrain:

    scala> time is money
    res8: Boolean = false


Operations on Units
-------------------

Any two units may be multiplied or divided, or exponentiated.
Compatibile units are required for addition, subtraction, or
comparisons.

    println(km > mile)  // => false
    println(km > hour)  // => throws IncompatibleUnitsException

When adding or subtracting units, the result will be expressed in the
units of the left operand.

    println(1 (min) + 30 (s))  // => 1.5 min
    println(30 (s) + 1 (min))  // => 90 s


License
-------

Copyright (c) 2012 Bradley W. Kimmel

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

Commit message:

Add note about dimensions property to README

README.md, after:

Scala Units
===========

Project for run-time interpretation, conversion, and analysis of units
in Scala.

Example:

    val u = new UnitsParser
    // ... load units ...

    val v = 80 * u("km/hr") 
    val t = 5 * u("min")
    val d = v * t

    println(d in u("miles"))  // => 4.1424746 miles


Importing Units
---------------

Units may be loaded from [GNU Units](http://www.gnu.org/software/units/)
definition files.

    val u = new UnitsParser
    val f = Source.fromFile("/usr/share/units/definitions.units", "utf-8")

    u.load(f)

Limitations:

  - ''!include'' directives are not followed.
  - Non-linear units (i.e., function definitions) are not supported.
  - Addition and subtraction is not supported

Definitions may be added manually:

    u.define("fortnight 2 weeks")

The definition should follow the GNU Units
[definition](http://www.gnu.org/software/units/manual/units.html#Unit-Definitions)
format, subject to the limitations above.


Parsing Units
-------------

Units may be parsed from the GNU Units
[expression](http://www.gnu.org/software/units/manual/units.html#Unit-Expressions)
format, subject to the limitations above.

    val x = u("1|3 m / s2")


Common Units
------------

Common units may be imported for convenience:

    val u = new UnitsParser
    // ... load units ...

    val common = new CommonUnits(u)
    import common._

    val g = 9.8 (m / (s ** 2))
    val e = 1.3 (kW) * 8 (hours) in J


Unit Conversion
---------------

### Basic unit conversion

To convert a value to different units, use the "in" operator:

    val x = 1 (m) in ft 
    println(x)  // => 3.280839 ft

### Natural units

To convert a value to the most natural of units from a sequence, use
the "inOneOf" operator with multiple units in descending order by
magnitude.  The units selected will be the first units for which the
numerical value is at least 1, or the last units if none of the provided
units yield a numerical value at least 1.

    val x = 90 (seconds) inOneOf (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => 1.5 min

    val x = 2100 (MHz) inOneOf (GHz, MHz, kHz, Hz)
    println(x)  // => 2.1 GHz

    val x = 1 (mL) inOneOf (gal, quart, pint, cups, tbsp, tsp)
    println(x)  // => 0.2 tsp

### Compound units

To convert a value to compound units (e.g., hours, minutes, seconds),
use the "in" operator with multiple units in descending order by
magnitude.  Each component will have an integral numerical value, except
potentially the last component.  Zero-valued components will be dropped.

    val x = 90.2 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 min, 30.2 s)

    val x = 3602 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 hour, 2 s)

To break up the last component into integral and fractional parts,
simply duplicate the last units:

    val x = 90.2 (seconds) in (hour, min, s, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 min, 30 s, 0.2 s)

To include zero-valued components, use "inAllOf":

    val x = 90.2 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(0 hour, 1 min, 30.2 s)

    val x = 3602 (seconds) in (hour, min, s)
    println(x)  // => List(1 hour, 0 min, 2 s)


Dimensional Analysis
--------------------

### Canonical Form

Units may be converted to canonical form using the "canonical" property.
Canonical units are expressed as a scalar value and powers of primitive
units.

    println(kW canonical)  // => 1000 kg m^2 s^-3

Values may be converted between units if, in their canonical form, the
exponents on all primitive units are identical.  The "dimensions"
property may be used to obtain a the exponents in the form of a Map:

    println(kW dimensions)  // => Map(kg -> 1, m -> 2, s -> -3)

### Testing for Compatibility

To test for compatibility between units, use the "is" operator.

    val x = 55 (miles / hour)
    println(x is meter / second)  // => true
    println(x is kW)              // => false

CommonUnits provides pseudo-units for classes of units (time, length,
area, etc), to make dimensional analysis more convenient/readable.

    val x = 55 (miles / hour)
    println(x is speed)  // => true
    println(x is power)  // => false

    println(speed is time / length)  // => true
    println(mpg is 1 / area)         // => true (yes.. it really is)

Contrary to the popular refrain:

    scala> time is money
    res8: Boolean = false


Operations on Units
-------------------

Any two units may be multiplied or divided, or exponentiated.
Compatibile units are required for addition, subtraction, or
comparisons.

    println(km > mile)  // => false
    println(km > hour)  // => throws IncompatibleUnitsException

When adding or subtracting units, the result will be expressed in the
units of the left operand.

    println(1 (min) + 30 (s))  // => 1.5 min
    println(30 (s) + 1 (min))  // => 90 s


License
-------

Copyright (c) 2012 Bradley W. Kimmel

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
